---
layout: post
title: Movies
date: '2015-06-19 20:03:30'
tags:
- scribbles
- movies
- culture
---

Summarizing the movies I saw lately in (around) three words. 



**Take this waltz** - funny, loose, hot (as in weather). 

---

**My week with Marilyn** - dizzy, blond, sulky. 

---

**Wild** - arid, stubborn, hollow. 

---

**Before I Disappear** - amusing, quirky, grungy. 

---

**Revolutionary Road** - confused, weary, somehow missing the target. 

---

**The Lincoln Lawyer** - showy, edgy, heedful. 

---

**Holy Smoke** - slow-ish, "seems to get caught in its own net", naked. 

---

**Poetry** - sentimental(ish), punchy, gracile. 

---

**The One I Love**  - a mix of everything. a bit crazy, careless. 

---

**The Lovers** - Malle. Classy. 

---
**The Art of the Steal** - or, how to get 20 billion with 10 million $. Barnes Foundation. Philadelphia 

---

**The Master** - A bit scrambled. Very beautiful and perfectly acted. 

---

**Two Lives** - Sad. Heartbreaking but angrily so. Hits under the belt. 

---

**Silver Lining** - Could have been a bit shorter. Fun. Plot a bit wobbly. 

---

**Fading Gigolo** - Woody Allen does Woody Allen. Turturro should only be an actor.  

---

**In A World** - voice-over world, rather easy, fun. 

---

**The Shipping News** - compressed, difficult. Needs the book first. 

---

**Frances Ha** - New York, New York. Young. Hopeful. 

---

**Le Fils de l'Epiciere** - quite OK, funny at times, pensive. 

---

**Little Miss Sunshine** - have popcorn, will watch. And soda. 

---

**Walk the Line** - Folsom prison blues. Thump, thump, thump... 

---

**Seraphine** - nicely acted, true story. Almost. 

---

**Biutiful**. "one of the best films you will never want to see again" 

---

**Alceste à bicyclette** - story-line gaps, 

---

**Punch-Drunk Love** - although... Sandler, funny, eccentric. 

---

**Ghandi** - Lots of cotton being spun.  Salt making.  Fake blood.  

---

**Holy Motors** - linear inception. 

---

**Brokeback Mountain** -  Green, lots of sheep, swift, visceral.   

---

**The French Connection** - first part; the sequence should be better. 

---

**Depuis qu'Otar est parti** - Georgia, old, sparkling, heartening. 

---
**Educating Rita** - funny, old-school. 

---

**Inception** - too wide a premise, volatile, fun to watch if you buy in. 

---

**Oldboy** - smitten, 15 years!, crazy scenes, Oedipus in reverse. 

---

**Les 400 Coups** - classy, classical, intimate. 

---

 **Ladri di Biciclete** - a collapsing world, a father-son odyssey. 

---

**The Hitchhiker's Guide Through the Galaxy** - 42, funny, mad. 

---

**There Will be Blood** - sweaty, dusty, oily, deafeningly quiet, viperine. 

---
**Anna Karenina** - the visible and the invisible, the play that is no play, though it comes comes across as a playful show.  

---

**The words** - bad(ish), thin, poor. 

**Being Flynn** - dark, rounceval, the story within a story from the point of view of the writer, the writer within the writer.  

---

**Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb** - another sort of Kubrick, of which I know little about.   

---

**Babel** - Iñárritu, emotional, weary, almost Hollywood-ian. 

---
**Stories we Tell** - a revelation. 

---
**Gerhard Richter Painting** - red, yellow, green, smudge. 

---
**Sunshine cleaning** - have popcorn. And soda. 